Convert Web Bluetooth article from WebFu (#4090)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/bluetooth/index.md

6.0, Mac (Chrome 56) and Windows 10 (Chrome 70). This means you should be able
to [request] and [connect to] nearby Bluetooth Low Energy devices,
[read]/[write] Bluetooth characteristics, [receive GATT Notifications], know
when a [Bluetooth device gets disconnected], and even [read and write to
Bluetooth descriptors].

For Linux and earlier versions of Windows, enable the
`#experimental-web-platform-features` flag in `chrome://flags`.

### Available for Origin Trials

In order to get as much feedback as possible from developers using the Web
Bluetooth API in the field, we've previously added this feature in Chrome 53 as
an [origin trial] for Chrome OS, Android, and Mac.

The trial has successfully ended in January 2017.

## Security Requirements

To understand the security tradeoffs, I recommend the [Web Bluetooth Security
Model] post from Jeffrey Yasskin, a software engineer on the Chrome team,
working on the Web Bluetooth API specification.

### HTTPS Only

Because this experimental API is a powerful new feature added to the Web, it is
made available only to [secure contexts]. This means you'll need to build with

> TLS in mind.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[TLS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transport_Layer_Security) in mind.
```
I'm not sure if we can expect everyone to know how TLS relates to HTTPS so I think it's safer to provide a link

Author: Done.

> ### User Gesture Required

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### User gesture required
```

Author: Done.

As a security feature, discovering Bluetooth devices with
`navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice` must be triggered by [a user gesture] such
as a touch or a mouse click. We're talking about listening to
[`pointerup`], `click`, and `touchend` events.

```js
button.addEventListener('pointerup', function(event) {
  // Call navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice
});
```

> ## Get into the Code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Get into the code
```

Author: Done.

The Web Bluetooth API relies heavily on JavaScript [Promises]. If you're not
familiar with them, check out this great [Promises tutorial]. One more thing,
`() => {}` are simply ECMAScript 2015 [Arrow functions] -- they have a shorter

> syntax compared to function expressions and lexically bind the `this` value.

Reviewer: As @jpmedley mentioned in the USB PR review ([comment](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/web.dev/pull/4095/files#r508844564)), I'm not sure we still need to explain promises and arrow functions. Either way, the two articles should be consistent.

Author: I've removed the explanation but kept links as developers interested in Bluetooth or USB may not necessarily be web developers.

> ### Request Bluetooth Devices

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Request Bluetooth devices
```

Author: Done.

This version of the Web Bluetooth API specification allows websites, running in
the Central role, to connect to remote GATT Servers over a BLE connection. It
supports communication among devices that implement Bluetooth 4.0 or later.

When a website requests access to nearby devices using

> `navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice`, the browser will prompt user with a device

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice`, the browser prompts a user with a device
```
https://web.dev/handbook/content-checklist/#present-tense

Author: Done.

chooser where they can pick one device or simply cancel the request.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <video controls autoplay loop muted>
    <source src="https://storage.googleapis.com/web-dev-assets/bluetooth/bluetooth-device-chooser.mp4">
  </video>

>   <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Bluetooth device user prompt.</figcaption>

Reviewer: Link to the demo please

Author: Done.

</figure>

> The `navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice` function takes a mandatory Object that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice` function takes a mandatory object that
```

Author: Done.

defines filters. These filters are used to return only devices that match some
advertised Bluetooth GATT services and/or the device name.

> For instance, requesting Bluetooth devices advertising the [Bluetooth GATT
> Battery Service] is this simple:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, to request Bluetooth devices advertising the [Bluetooth GATT
Battery Service]:
```
I try to avoid labeling things as simple or easy and just stick to the facts. It's not a big deal here and I think one could argue that this is indeed simple, but for the sake of consistency throughout the web.dev codebase I'd prefer to continue avoiding it.

Author: Done.

```js
navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice({ filters: [{ services: ['battery_service'] }] })
.then(device => { /* ... */ })

> .catch(error => { console.log(error); });

Reviewer: Use `console.error` instead throughout the post?

Author: Done.

with the `name` filters key, or even a prefix of this name with the `namePrefix`
filters key. Note that in this case, you will also need to define the
`optionalServices` key to be able to access some services. If you don't, you'll
get an error later when trying to access them.

```js
navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice({
  filters: [{
    name: 'Francois robot'
  }],
  optionalServices: ['battery_service']
})
.then(device => { /* ... */ })
.catch(error => { console.log(error); });
```

Finally, instead of `filters` you can use the `acceptAllDevices` key to show all
nearby Bluetooth devices. You will also need to define the `optionalServices`
key to be able to access some services. If you don't, you'll get an error later
when trying to access them.

```js
navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice({
  acceptAllDevices: true,
  optionalServices: ['battery_service']
})
.then(device => { /* ... */ })
.catch(error => { console.log(error); });
```

{% Aside 'caution' %}
This may result in a bunch of unrelated devices being shown in the chooser and
energy being wasted as there are no filters. Use it with caution.
{% endAside %}

> ### Connect to a Bluetooth Device

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Connect to a Bluetooth device
```

Author: Done

> So what do you do now that you have a `BluetoothDevice` returned from
> `navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice`'s Promise? Let's connect to the Bluetooth

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So what do you do now that you have a `BluetoothDevice`? Let's connect to the Bluetooth
```
Nitpick: Can we avoid the inline code followed by "'s"? (`navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice`'s)

It looks awkward:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/4713486/96657625-860aaa00-12f7-11eb-8e2a-9e75e7f98ac8.png)

Author: Done.

remote GATT Server which holds the service and characteristic definitions.

```js
navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice({ filters: [{ services: ['battery_service'] }] })
.then(device => {
  // Human-readable name of the device.
  console.log(device.name);

  // Attempts to connect to remote GATT Server.
  return device.gatt.connect();
})
.then(server => { /* ... */ })
.catch(error => { console.log(error); });
```

> ### Read a Bluetooth Characteristic

Reviewer: Note to self: In this case it seems like `Bluetooth Characteristic` should be capitalized

Here we are connected to the GATT Server of the remote Bluetooth device. Now we
want to get a Primary GATT Service and read a characteristic that belongs to
this service. Let's try, for instance, to read the current charge level of the
device's battery.

In the example below, `battery_level` is the [standardized Battery Level
Characteristic].

```js
navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice({ filters: [{ services: ['battery_service'] }] })
.then(device => device.gatt.connect())
.then(server => {
  // Getting Battery Service...
  return server.getPrimaryService('battery_service');
})
.then(service => {
  // Getting Battery Level Characteristic...
  return service.getCharacteristic('battery_level');
})
.then(characteristic => {
  // Reading Battery Level...
  return characteristic.readValue();
})
.then(value => {

>   console.log('Battery percentage is ' + value.getUint8(0));

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  console.log(`Battery percentage is ${value.getUint8(0)}`);
```

Author: Done

})
.catch(error => { console.log(error); });
```

If you use a custom Bluetooth GATT characteristic, you may provide either the
full Bluetooth UUID or a short 16- or 32-bit form to
`service.getCharacteristic`.

Note that you can also add a `characteristicvaluechanged` event listener on a
characteristic to handle reading its value. Check out the [Read Characteristic
Value Changed Sample] to see how to optionally handle upcoming GATT
notifications as well.

```js

> ...

Reviewer: Please do a search-and-replace for `...` (three periods) and replace it with `…` (the ellipsis character)

I know this sounds kinda nitpicky but we do it so that the idea is properly announced to screen readers

Author: Done. Thank you!

  // Reading Battery Level...
  return characteristic.readValue();
})
.catch(error => { console.log(error); });

function handleBatteryLevelChanged(event) {
  const batteryLevel = event.target.value.getUint8(0);
  console.log('Battery percentage is ' + batteryLevel);
}
```

### Write to a Bluetooth Characteristic

Writing to a Bluetooth GATT Characteristic is as easy as reading it. This time,
let's use the Heart Rate Control Point to reset the value of the Energy Expended
field to 0 on a heart rate monitor device.

I promise there is no magic here. It's all explained in the [Heart Rate Control
Point Characteristic page].

```js
navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice({ filters: [{ services: ['heart_rate'] }] })
.then(device => device.gatt.connect())
.then(server => server.getPrimaryService('heart_rate'))
.then(service => service.getCharacteristic('heart_rate_control_point'))
.then(characteristic => {
  // Writing 1 is the signal to reset energy expended.
  const resetEnergyExpended = Uint8Array.of(1);
  return characteristic.writeValue(resetEnergyExpended);
})
.then(_ => {
  console.log('Energy expended has been reset.');
})
.catch(error => { console.log(error); });
```

> ### Receive GATT Notifications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Receive GATT notifications
```

Author: Done

Now, let's see how to be notified when the [Heart Rate Measurement]
characteristic changes on the device:

```js
navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice({ filters: [{ services: ['heart_rate'] }] })
.then(device => device.gatt.connect())
.then(server => server.getPrimaryService('heart_rate'))
.then(service => service.getCharacteristic('heart_rate_measurement'))
.then(characteristic => characteristic.startNotifications())
.then(characteristic => {
  characteristic.addEventListener('characteristicvaluechanged',
                                  handleCharacteristicValueChanged);
  console.log('Notifications have been started.');
})
.catch(error => { console.log(error); });

function handleCharacteristicValueChanged(event) {
  const value = event.target.value;
  console.log('Received ' + value);
  // TODO: Parse Heart Rate Measurement value.
  // See https://github.com/WebBluetoothCG/demos/blob/gh-pages/heart-rate-sensor/heartRateSensor.js
}
```

> The [Notifications Sample] will show you to how to stop notifications with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Notifications Sample] shows you to how to stop notifications with
```
https://web.dev/handbook/content-checklist/#present-tense

Author: Done.

`stopNotifications()` and properly remove the added `characteristicvaluechanged`
event listener.

> ### Get disconnected from a Bluetooth Device

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Disconnect from a Bluetooth Device
```
You can ignore this suggestion if there's a technical difference between your original phrasing and what I'm proposing here

Author: Done

> To provide a better user experience, you may want to show a warning message if
> the `BluetoothDevice` gets disconnected to invite the user to reconnect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To provide a better user experience, you may want to listen for disconnection events
and invite the user to reconnect:
```
The original phrasing seems a bit awkward to me. Is this rephrasing OK?

Author: Yep. Done

```js
navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice({ filters: [{ name: 'Francois robot' }] })
.then(device => {
  // Set up event listener for when device gets disconnected.
  device.addEventListener('gattserverdisconnected', onDisconnected);

  // Attempts to connect to remote GATT Server.
  return device.gatt.connect();
})
.then(server => { /* ... */ })
.catch(error => { console.log(error); });

function onDisconnected(event) {
  const device = event.target;

>   console.log('Device ' + device.name + ' is disconnected.');

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  console.log(`Device ${device.name} is disconnected.`);
```

Author: Done

`getPrimaryService(s)`, `getCharacteristic(s)`, etc.) these attributes after
reconnecting.
{% endAside %}

### Read and write to Bluetooth descriptors

Bluetooth GATT descriptors are attributes that describe a characteristic value.
You can read and write them to in a similar way to Bluetooth GATT
characteristics.

Let's see for instance how to read the user description of the measurement
interval of the device's health thermometer.

In the example below, `health_thermometer` is the [Health Thermometer service],
`measurement_interval` the [Measurement Interval characteristic], and
`gatt.characteristic_user_description` the [Characteristic User Description
descriptor].

```js/4-9
navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice({ filters: [{ services: ['health_thermometer'] }] })
.then(device => device.gatt.connect())
.then(server => server.getPrimaryService('health_thermometer'))
.then(service => service.getCharacteristic('measurement_interval'))
.then(characteristic => characteristic.getDescriptor('gatt.characteristic_user_description'))
.then(descriptor => descriptor.readValue())
.then(value => {
  const decoder = new TextDecoder('utf-8');

>   console.log('User Description: ' + decoder.decode(value));

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  console.log(`User Description: ${decoder.decode(value)}`);
```

Author: Done

})
.catch(error => { console.log(error); });
````

Now that we've read the user description of the measurement interval of the
device's health thermometer, let's see how to update it and write a custom
value.

```js/5-9
navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice({ filters: [{ services: ['health_thermometer'] }] })
.then(device => device.gatt.connect())
.then(server => server.getPrimaryService('health_thermometer'))
.then(service => service.getCharacteristic('measurement_interval'))
.then(characteristic => characteristic.getDescriptor('gatt.characteristic_user_description'))
.then(descriptor => {
  const encoder = new TextEncoder('utf-8');
  const userDescription = encoder.encode('Defines the time between measurements.');
  return descriptor.writeValue(userDescription);
})
.catch(error => { console.log(error); });
```

> ## Samples, Demos and Codelabs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Samples, demos, and codelabs
```

Author: Done

All [Web Bluetooth samples] below have been successfully tested. To enjoy these
samples to their fullest, I recommend you install the [BLE Peripheral Simulator
Android App] which simulates a BLE peripheral with a Battery Service, a Heart Rate

> Service, or a Health Thermometer Service.

Reviewer: As @jpmedley mentioned in the USB article ([comment](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/web.dev/pull/4095/files#r508851245)), are we still confident that all the samples/codelabs/etc. work?

Author: Yep. I maintain Web Bluetooth samples, demos, and codelabs

- [Read Descriptors](https://googlechrome.github.io/samples/web-bluetooth/read-descriptors.html) - read all characteristic's descriptors of a service from a BLE Device.
- [Write Descriptor](https://googlechrome.github.io/samples/web-bluetooth/write-descriptor.html) - write to the descriptor "Characteristic User Description" on a BLE Device.

Check out our [curated Web Bluetooth Demos] and [official Web Bluetooth Codelabs] as well.

## Libraries

- [web-bluetooth-utils] is a npm module that adds some convenience functions to
  the API.
- A Web Bluetooth API shim is available in [noble], the most popular Node.js BLE
  central module. This allows you to webpack/browserify noble without the need
  for a WebSocket server or other plugins.
- [angular-web-bluetooth] is a module for [Angular] that abstracts away all the
  boilerplate needed to configure the Web Bluetooth API.
- [&lt;platinum-bluetooth>] is a set of [Polymer] elements to discover and
  communicate with nearby Bluetooth devices based on the Web Bluetooth API. For
  instance, here's how to read battery level from a nearby bluetooth device

>   advertising a Battery service:

Reviewer: No longer maintained, right?

Author: This one has been archived indeed.
I was thinking about keeping it for the posterity but it looks like you suggest I should remove it. So let's do that ;)

  
```js
<platinum-bluetooth-device services-filter='["battery_service"]'>
  <platinum-bluetooth-service service='battery_service'>
    <platinum-bluetooth-characteristic characteristic='battery_level'>
    </platinum-bluetooth-characteristic>
  </platinum-bluetooth-service>
</platinum-bluetooth-device>
```

```js
const bluetoothDevice = document.querySelector('platinum-bluetooth-device');
const batteryLevel = document.querySelector('platinum-bluetooth-characteristic');

bluetoothDevice.request()
.then(_ => batteryLevel.read())
.then(value => {
  console.log('Battery percentage is ' + value.getUint8(0));
})
.catch(error => { console.log(error); });
```

## Tools

- [Get Started with Web Bluetooth] is a simple Web App that will generate all
  the JavaScript boilerplate code to start interacting with a Bluetooth device.
  Enter a device name, a service, a characteristic, define its properties and
  you're good to go.
- If you're already a Bluetooth developer, the [Web Bluetooth Developer Studio
  Plugin] will also generate the Web Bluetooth JavaScript code for your
  Bluetooth device.

> ## Dev Tips

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Tips
```
Considering that our site is targeted at web developers I don't think we need to preface it as `Dev Tips`

Author: Done

> A "Bluetooth Internals" page is available in Chrome at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A **Bluetooth Internals** page is available in Chrome at
```
https://developers.google.com/style/ui-elements#formatting

Author: Done

`chrome://bluetooth-internals` so that you can inspect everything about nearby
Bluetooth devices: status, services, characteristics, and descriptors.

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img src="./bluetooth-internals.png" class="w-screenshot" alt="Screenshot of the internal page to debug Bluetooth in Chrome">

Author: Squooshed!

  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Internal page in Chrome for debugging Bluetooth devices.</figcaption>
</figure>

> I would also recommend you check out the official ["How to file Web Bluetooth
> bugs"] page as debugging Bluetooth can be hard sometimes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I also recommend checking out the official [How to file Web Bluetooth
bugs] page as debugging Bluetooth can be hard sometimes.
```
Quotes around the link are not needed

Author: Done

> ## What's next

Reviewer: Is this status still up-to-date?

Author: Weirdly enough it is actually ;)

Check the [browser and platform implementation status] first to know which parts
of the Web Bluetooth API are currently being implemented.

Though it's still incomplete, here's a sneak peek of what to expect in the near
future:

- [Scanning for nearby BLE advertisements](https://github.com/WebBluetoothCG/web-bluetooth/pull/239)
  will happen with `navigator.bluetooth.requestLEScan()`.
- A new `serviceadded` event will track newly discovered Bluetooth GATT Services
  while `serviceremoved` event will track removed ones. A new `servicechanged`
  event will fire when any characteristic and/or descriptor gets added or
  removed from a Bluetooth GATT Service.

> {% YouTube '_BUwOBdLjzQ' %}

Reviewer: Linking to a video from 2015 in a section called `Whats next?` sends a strange message. I'm OK with embedding the video, but perhaps you want to move it to a different section?

Author: I've moved it between resources and new acknowledgments section

## Resources

- Stack Overflow: [https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/web-bluetooth](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/web-bluetooth)
- Chrome Feature Status: [https://www.chromestatus.com/feature/5264933985976320](https://www.chromestatus.com/feature/5264933985976320)

> - Implementation Bugs: [https://crbug.com/?q=component:Blink>Bluetooth](https://crbug.com/?q=component:Blink>Bluetooth)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Chrome Implementation Bugs: [https://crbug.com/?q=component:Blink>Bluetooth](https://crbug.com/?q=component:Blink>Bluetooth)
```

Author: Done

[Web Bluetooth samples]: https://googlechrome.github.io/samples/web-bluetooth/index.html
[BLE Peripheral Simulator Android App]: https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=io.github.webbluetoothcg.bletestperipheral
[curated Web Bluetooth Demos]: https://github.com/WebBluetoothCG/demos
[official Web Bluetooth Codelabs]: https://github.com/search?q=org%3Agooglecodelabs+bluetooth
[web-bluetooth-utils]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/web-bluetooth-utils
[noble]: https://github.com/sandeepmistry/noble
[angular-web-bluetooth]: https://github.com/manekinekko/angular-web-bluetooth
[Angular]: https://angularjs.org
[&lt;platinum-bluetooth>]: https://www.webcomponents.org/element/googlearchive/platinum-bluetooth
[Polymer]: https://www.polymer-project.org/
[Get Started with Web Bluetooth]: https://beaufortfrancois.github.io/sandbox/web-bluetooth/generator
[Web Bluetooth Developer Studio Plugin]: https://github.com/beaufortfrancois/sandbox/tree/gh-pages/web-bluetooth/bluetooth-developer-studio-plugin
["How to file Web Bluetooth bugs"]: https://sites.google.com/a/chromium.org/dev/developers/how-tos/file-web-bluetooth-bugs

> [browser and platform implementation status]: https://github.com/WebBluetoothCG/web-bluetooth/blob/master/implementation-status.md

Author: Done
